The centaurprogrammer-How Kasparov’s AdvancedChess span s
overto the so/f_tware developmentofthe future
PEDROALVES, LusófonaUniversity, Portugal
BRUNO PEREIRACIPRIANO, Lusófona University, Portugal
We introducetheidea ofCentaur Programmer,based onthepre misethat acollaborativeapproachbetweenhumans and AI
will be more eﬀective than AI alone, as demonstrated in centa ur chess tournaments where mixed teams of humans and AI
beat solecomputers.
The paper introduces several collaborationmodels for prog ramming alongside an AI, including the guidance model,the
sketch model,andtheinverted controlmodel,andsuggests t hatuniversities shouldpreparefutureprogrammers foramo re
eﬃcient and productiveprogramming environment augmented with AI.
We hope to contribute to the important discussion about the d iverse ways whereby humans and AI can work together
inprogramminginthenextdecade,howuniversities shouldh andlethesechanges andsomelegal implicationssurroundin g
this topic.
Additional KeyWords and Phrases: PositionPaper,Artiﬁcia lIntelligence, Programming
1 INTRODUCTION
Thevictoryofacomputer(DeepBlue)againstGaryKasparov,t heworldchesschampion,in1997wasamilestone
in AI history and led many to predict the substitution of humans b y machines in a wide range of activities [3].
The digital revolution had been dismissing repetitive, high lystandardized tasks with little need for intellectual
skills, butnow it seemedthat even highlycomplextaskscould beperformedbymachines,at lowcost andhigh
eﬃciency.
One such task is programming itself. While many workers were alr eady concerned about maintaining their
jobs,thiswasnotonthemindsofthemillionsofprogrammersfue lingthedigitalrevolution.Afterall,someone
hastocreatethesystemsthatsupportthisrevolution.Recent ly,LLM-basedtools(e.g.,GPT-3)haveshowngreat
eﬀectivenessinprogrammingtasks,beingabletosolveexercis esatthelevelofanaveragestudentinaComputer
Engineering course [2]. New versions promise to improve this per formance [6]. Is this the Deep Blue vs. Gary
Kasparov momentofprogramming?Will even programmersthemse lves bereplaced byAI?
Wecannotpredictthefuture,butwecanlearnfromthepast.Ret urningtotheworldofchess,afterKasparov’s
defeat,therewereseveralexperimentswithcompetitionsinvo lvinghumansandAI,whichwerecalled"Centaur
Chess"1inanalogytothemythologicalﬁgureoftheCentaurthatwashal fhuman,halfhorse.Fromtheseexper-
iments,one,inparticular,broughtinteresting ﬁndings.In2005, therewasachesstournamentinwhichallkinds
of entities could compete:computers, chess champions,and mix ed teams composed of humans and computers.
Itwasalreadyexpectedthatcomputerswouldbeatchesscham pions,butwhatwasnotexpectedwasthatmixed
teamswould beat computers.In otherwords, thecombination o fhuman+AIseemedto be moreeﬀective than
AI alone.Theidea ofthe Centaur asa modelfor future workwasst arting to takeshape [1].
Inthispaper,wearguethatsomethingsimilarwillhappeninp rogramming.Ateamformedbyprogrammers
(humans)and AIwill bemore eﬀective thanAI alone,hencetheterm Centaur Programmer.
1Alsoknownas "Advanced Chess"
Authors’ addresses: Pedro Alves, Lusófona University, Campo Gr ande, 376, Lisbon, Portugal, 1700-097, pedro.alves@ulusofona .pt; Bruno
Pereira Cipriano, Lusófona University, Campo Grande, 376,Lisbon,Port ugal,1700-097,bcipriano@ulusofona.pt.2 • Pedro Alves andBrunoPereira Cipriano
We propose several models under which this collaboration may occur, show how universities may adapt to
this new reality, draw attention to legal and ethical implicati ons and ﬁnish with some conclusions about what
the future may holdforthistopic.
2 COLLABORATIONMODELS
The collaboration between human and AI has already been succe ssfully proven in other areas. Maurice Conti
demonstrated that, with the help of AI, he was able to design ve ry eﬃcient equipment that would never have
seen the light of day if the teams were purely made up of humans o r AI [4]. The process was simple: humans
deﬁned objectivesandconstraintsrelatedtoacertainproblem, andAIevolved possible solutionswithconstant
validation fromhumans.
Thiscollaborationmodel,whichwe cancallthe "guidance mod el,"isone ofthe most interesting possibilities
alsofortheprogrammingarea.Theprogrammerstartstheproc ess,indicatingtotheAIwhattheobjectivesand
assumptions are, and the AI responds with solutions. With the hel p of the programmer, these solutions evolve
until theyreachthedesired result.Theﬁnalsolution mayorma ynot bebetter thanasolution purelyimagined
by the programmer,but it will probably be achieved muchmore quickly. For now, we are mainly talking about
eﬃciencygainsratherthannew solutions. ButAItechnologiesare evolving rapidly,and,in thenear future,we
may actually have better-designed programs with fewer bugs a nd more eﬃcient if created in a collaborative
model.
Othercollaborationmodelsmaybeexploredinsoftwaredeve lopment.Inthe"sketchmodel,"theprogrammer
outlines theprogram’sstructure andtheAIﬁllsin thegaps.Wh iletoolslikeGitHubCopilot(basedontheGPT
technology) currently seem to ﬁt this model [7], we believe the y have a limited role, acting on a function-by-
function basis rather than holistically (i.e., "I will creat e this class because it will be useful in N other parts of
the program").
In the "inverted control model," the communication direction i s reversed: the AI asks the programmer what
they intend to dountil it objectively understands thegoaland const raints beforeimplementation.
All of these models require a rethinking of the software develo pment cycle. Programmersare already accus-
tomed to "boosting"their eﬃciency through a "query model"whe re they simply ask questions to the computer
(e.g.,Stack Overﬂow).The initial reaction to toolslike Cha tGPThas beento transpose this model- when infor-
mationislacking,theprogrammerasksChatGPTinasimilar ma nnertothequerytheywouldmakeonGoogle
or Stack Overﬂow. But is this the most eﬃcient model? In this mo del, the programmer still does most of the
typing, wasting the potential gainsthat a true programmer-centa urcanhave.
3 THEROLE OF UNIVERSITIES
If these new modelsare to profoundly transform the software dev elopment industry, that transformation must
begin in universities, where future programmers are being edu cated. Universities should start exploring and
integrating these new collaboration models into their software development curricula to prepare the future
workforce for a more eﬃcient and productive programming environm ent. It is not enough to prepare future
programmers,theymust prepare future centaur programmers.
We believe that this transformation will be gradual and experi mental. In the ﬁrst phase, we will have the
modelofthe "virtual tutor",where the student uses AIto help themlearn.Thistutor canexplain to thestudent
what a certain piece of code doesor what a particular error me ans. It can help them verify if a certain solution
is correct or propose improvements to the code developed by th e student. It can even convert a program to
diﬀerent programming languages. In any case, we are talking about a learning-centered process - the student
wantstoknowmoreandAIhelpstheminthisprocess,complementing theroleoftheteacher.Afterall,theideaThe centaurprogrammer- HowKasparov’sAdvanced Chess span s overto theso/f_tware developmentof the future • 3
of havingapersonaltutor dedicatedto eachstudent would haves eemedutopian until recentlydueto thecosts
it would entail. Not anymorewith AI.
Butthe"virtualtutor"model,whileimportant,hasnothingtod owiththeideaofthecentaur-programmer,as
the objectives are diﬀerent. The centaur-programmersaim to a ugment their ability throughcollaboration with
AI. This can translate into greater eﬃciency (producing solutio ns more quickly than they would without AI)
and/or greater quality (producing solutions of better quality than they would alone). Returning to the initial
concept of"centaurchess",the goalwasto win the game,not so mu chto learnto playchess.
Therefore, a second phase will emerge in which students actual ly learn to augment their abilities with the
help of AI.The analogyof the scientiﬁc calculator hasbeen wid ely used and seemsappropriate. Thecalculator
aloneisoflittleusebecauseitdoesnotknowwhichcalculations toperform.Andthehumanaloneisineﬃcient
becauseittakestoolongtoperformcertaincalculations.Ahu manequippedwithacalculatoris,infact,acentaur
that uses a collaborationmodelacceptedin theacademicwor ld.
Is this analogy valid? A calculator simply reproduces the sam e mechanical process as a student performing
mathematicaloperations(albeitmuchmorequickly).Howeve r,toolslikeChatGPTcancreatenewcontentfrom
a set of interactions. Students can abuse these tools to solve co mplete programming exercises without actually
knowing how to program. This has even led several universities t o simply ban/prohibit the use of these tools
[5].But if the industry is massively adopting theuse ofthese t oolsdue tothe potential increase in productivity
that results from it,shouldn’t universities follow the samep ath?
Returning to the analogy,there is a key point that remains valid. B oth the calculatorand ChatGPT (or other
formsofAI)aredependent onahumantoproducesomethinguseful .Infact,the level ofusefulnessthat canbe
extracted from these toolsdepends directly on the ability of the humanusing them. An advanced mathematics
studentcancertainlyuseascientiﬁccalculatormoreeﬀective lyandusefullythanaprimaryschoolstudent-here
we use the term "useful" to refer to the ability to solve a real problem rather than just solve academic exercises.
Thesamegoesforexperiencedprogrammerswhowillusetheira nalyticalandcreativeabilitytocreateprograms
that solve real problems.Thepiecesthat makeupthese progr amsmaybedeveloped byAI,but knowingwhich
piecesto build andhow toconnectthemwill continue to betheexclu sive responsibility ofthehuman.Ifit was
already clear that universities should invest more in develop ing these capabilities, it now becomes even more
evident.
4 LEGALAND ETHICALIMPLICATIONS
Therehasbeenmuchdiscussionabouttheethicalandlegalimp licationsofusingAIasatool,particularlywithin
thesubset ofAIbasedonLLMs,asit istrainedonlargequantiti es ofinformationgeneratedbyhumans.On the
one hand, the unauthorized use of content raises legal questions. O n the other hand, it introduces biases that
replicate patterns ofbehavior in society andmaylead to racis m,xenophobia,or othertypesof discrimination.
Here, too, the ﬁgure of the centaur programmer is important as i t assumes prior (human) validation of the
content produced by AI. This validation derives from an assump tion that seems essential to us: the content
producedbyacollaborationbetweenhumansandAIshouldultim atelybethesoleresponsibilityofhumans.For
example, humans may prefer to use LLMs trained on a dataset prev iously curated by them to ensure that: (1)
therearenolegalproblemswiththeunauthorizeduseofcontent; (2)thereisnoincorrectorbiasedinformation
feedingthe training engine.
Inthiscontext,Universities alsoplayacriticalroleindeve lopingandopenlydiscussingtheethicalguidelines
for the use of AI technologies. It makes sense for universities t o host and train their own LLMs, based on data
produced by the university itself or previously curated by it , making sure it adheres to the previously deﬁned
guidelines.4 • Pedro Alvesand BrunoPereiraCipriano
5 CONCLUSION
Centaur-programmersarecoming.Theywillbehumansabletoaug menttheirprogrammingabilities bycollab-
oratingwithAI.Theywillaccomplishthesoftwarerequireme ntsmuchfasterandwithbetterqualitythantheir
solehumancounterparts.Theywillbetrainedbytheiruniversi tytoexplorediﬀerentcollaborationmodelswith
AI, such as the guidance and the sketch model. They will also hav e a strong critical spirit and highly ethical
values that will act as a safeguard to the content produced by AI . Because, in the end, the code may have been
created byAI but itsthe humanprogrammerwhowill take respo nsibility forit.
REFERENCES
[1] Nicky Case.2018. How ToBecome A Centaur. Journal ofDesignand Science (Jan. 2018). https://doi.org/10.21428/61b2215c
[2] James Finnie-Ansley,Paul Denny,Brett A.Becker,AndrewLuxton-R eilly,andJames Prather.2022. TheRobots AreComing: Exploring
theImplicationsofOpenAICodexonIntroductoryProgramming.In AustralasianComputingEducationConference .ACM,VirtualEvent
Australia,10–19. https://doi.org/10.1145/3511861.35118 63
[3] Demis Hassabis. 2017. Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Chess match of th e century. Nature544, 7651 (April 2017), 413–414.
https://doi.org/10.1038/544413a Number:7651Publisher:N ature PublishingGroup.
[4] DouglasHeaven.2018.Thedesignerchangingthewayaircraftare built. https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20181129-the -ai-transforming-the-way-aircraft-are-built
[5] Kayla Jimenez. 2023. ’This shouldn’t be a surprise’ The educat ion community shares mixed reactions to ChatGPT.
https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/education/2023/01/ 30/chatgpt-going-banned-teachers-sound-alarm-new-ai-tech/1 1069593002/
[6] OpenAI.2023. GPT-4 Technical Report. https://doi.org/10. 48550/arXiv.2303.08774 arXiv:2303.08774[cs].
[7] Sida Peng, Eirini Kalliamvakou, Peter Cihon, and Mert Demirer. 2023 . The Impact of AI on Developer Productivity: Evidence from
GitHub Copilot. http://arxiv.org/abs/2302.06590 arXiv:2302 .06590[cs].